WINNERS OF AWARDS AT "DRACULA 97"


A. AWARDS PRESENTED BY THE TRANSYLVANIAN SOCIETY OF DRACULA


1. Transylvanian Knights of the Brasov Citadel
	
	Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (author)
	Fred Saberhagen (author)
	Jeanne Youngston (Count Dracula Fan Club)

2. Excellence in Historical Research

	Radu Florescu (Boston College)
	Raymond McNally (Boston College)

3. Significant Contribution to Dracula Fandom

	Eric Held (U.S.)
	Martin Riccardo (U.S.)
	Donald Reed (U.S)
	Bernard Davies (Great Britain)
	Sandrine Armirail (France)



B. WINNERS OF THE COUNT'S CREATIVE WRITING CONTEST

[This contest was sponsored by "Dracula 97" under the direction of
co-organizer Elizabeth Miller. Entries were accepted in 6 categories:
Poetry (Professional & Amateur), Short Fiction (P & A), Essay (P & A).
Because of the small number of entries in the Professional (Short Fiction
& Essay) categories, these were combined. The three judges for the Contest
were as follows: Margaret L. Carter (author and editor), P.N. Elrod
(author), and James Craig Holte, English professor.] 


POETRY (professional)
1st place: "Dream Creeper" by Karen R. Porter (Mays Landing NJ)
2nd place: "Dracula" by Christalene Loren (Topanga CA)
3rd place: "THe Dracula Poems" by Bruce McClelland (U of Virginia)


POETRY (amateur)
1st place: "Dracula 97" by Stu Burns (Omaha NE)
2nd place: "I Know What You Are" by Ron Malfi (Severna Park MD)
3rd place: "Dracula Versified" by Anne Fraser (Toronto, Canada)


SHORT FICTION (combined)
1st place: "Renfield or, Dining at the Bughouse" by Bill Zaget (Toronto)
2nd place: "Goodbye Mina" by Jane Mitchell (Waterloo ON, Canada)
2nd place (tie): "Thoughts of Anna" by Heather Bryan (Novato CA)


ESSAY (combined)
1st place: "The Vampire in the 1990s: The Right Choice for the
	Thirtysomething Generation" by Claire Skowronski (Montgomery AL)
2nd place: "Abbott and Costello Meet Dracula" by Jeffrey Miller (Los
	Angeles CA)


A booklet of the winning entries entitled "Blood
Offerings for Dracula" has been published. For information on how to
obtain a copy of this (and other "Dracula 97" publications, contact J.
Gordon Melton at jgordon@rain.org and put "Blood Offerings for Dracula"
as your subject heading. 



C. WINNERS IN THE FAN BALLOT SELECTIONS

[In addition to awards for the Writing Contest, a ballot was
conducted among attendees to select their favorites in a number of
categories. The results were announced by David Skal at the Awards
Ceremony and projected on to the two big screens at the front of the
Ballroom (as were our contest winners when they came to the stage to get
their awards).]  


The winners in the Fan Selection category were:


Best vampire short story of all time: "Carmilla" by Sheridan Le Fanu

Best vampire (non-Dracula) nonfiction book: "The Vampire Book" by Gordon
	Melton

Best vampire (Dracula) nonfiction book:(tie) "In Search of Dracula" by
	Florescu & McNally; "Hollywood Gothic" by David Skal

Best anthology of vampire stories: "Penguin Book of Vampire Stories"

Best vampire novel (non-Dracula): "Salem's Lot" by Stephen King

Best vampire novel (featuring Dracula): "The Dracula Tape" by Fred
	Saberhagen

Best vampire comedy film: "Love at First Bite" (1979)

Best performance by an actor as a vampire: Chris Sarandon in "Fright
	Night"

Best performance by an actress as a vampire: Kirsten Durst in "Interview
	with the Vampire" (1994)

Best performance by an actor as Dracula: Gary Oldman (1992)

Best film adaptation of "Dracula": "Bram Stoker's Dracula" (Coppola,
	1992)




D. WINNERS IN COSTUME CONTEST

1st place for best historical figure:

	"Vlad the Impaler": Dann Maurno

1st place for best interpretation:

	"Vlad and Mina" (from 1992 Coppola movie): Mairgh Bradley & Lisa Zagone


Here is a description of the costumes of "Vlad and Mina":

MINA wore a late Victorian-style two piece gown in crepe-backed satin
circa 1897. It featured a tunic-style bodice with oriental collar and
front closure. This gown and its fully boned corset were designed and
constructed by Lisa Zagone. Accessories included leather slippers, black
kid gloves, satin satchel with silk fringe, black silk rose garland in
hair. At other times at "Dracula 97" Mina wore: moss and black braid
walking dress with bustle (circa 1893-6); black and gold brocade 2-piece
gown with leg-o-mutton sleeves circa 1899; black taffetta American-style
Mourning Gown (circa 1860s); and a cream silk crepe strap gown with 2-tier
asymmetrical hem (circa 1920s).

VLAD's wardrobe blended elements of militarism, ethnicity, and Victorian
conservatism. A Victorian Romantic-style suit, medium gray silk-like
material, black satin trim with same period shirt pin-tuck bib, high
collar, full sleeve (circa 1815-40). Light tan eastern european military
dress trousers circa 1870. Dove gray and powder blue wool vest circa 1890.
All hand-made and patterned from authentic articles of clothing.
Accessorized by laced dress boots, silk wide cravat, garnet tie pin. On
other occasions at "Dracula 97" Vlad appeared in: fushia brocade military
jacket with plum dress trousers (circa 1860-70); moss cotton and black
satin Victorian romantic-style suit circa 1830 with light gray cossack
officer's formal wear trousres (circa 1888), dove gray and powder blue
vest (1890s) and Victorian formal wear shirt; gold and white eurastic
panel robe not of any set period; Hungarian szur light gray and burgundy
wool with Victorian 1840s shirt lavendar blue satin with black velvet
collar and cuffs.
(Thanks to Mairgh & Lisa for the above descriptions)




CONGRATULATIONS TO ALL WINNERS AT DRACULA 97!!!
