DRACULA 2000   [updated APRIL 10, 1999]


The Transylvanian Society of Dracula (Romania) announces the 2nd World
Dracula Congress ("Dracula 2000") to be held May 25-28 in the year 2000 at
Poiana Brasov, Transylvania. The theme of the Congress will be "Redefining
the Diabolic from the Perspective of Contemporary Society."

In addition to attending and/or giving papers at the conference, "Dracula
2000" participants will have the opportunity to join a "Dracula tour"
which will visit all the major sites in Romania associated with both the
historical and fictional Draculas.

[NOTE: You do NOT have to be a member of the Transylvanian Society of
Dracula to participate in this Congress or in the post-Congress tours.]

More information about this major event will be posted on this page as it
becomes available. Please bookmark this page and check back periodically.

Read on for the following details:

1. Call for Papers
2. Congress costs
3. Post-Congress tours


-----------------

CALL FOR PAPERS
THE 2nd WORLD DRACULA CONGRESS 

Dates: May 25-28, 2000
Organizer: Transylvanian Society of Dracula
Location: Poiana Brasov, Transylvania, Romania
Logistics: Company of Mysterious Journeys (Romania)


Theme: "Dracula in the Third Millennium
Redefining the Diabolic from the Perspective of Contemporary Society"

Sub-themes:
	Count Dracula: power and authority in the Third Millennium	
	The historical Dracula - the evolution of opinions
	Power and authority of the diabolic in contemporary time and space
	Perenniality and modernity of the Faustian legend
	Secular and sacred in contemporary faiths
	[Other related themes will be considered]

Abstracts/proposals of 500-700 words are invited from scholars and
researchers. Deadline for receipt is 10 October 1999 (with decision on
acceptance made by early November). Late proposals will be considered only
if space permits. 

Proposals are also invited from writers/artists/filmmakers for
participation in panels. Please send a brief indication of interest and a
resume of credentials.

All proposals are to be sent to:
		Nicolae Paduraru
		Transylvanian Society of Dracula
		47 Primaverii Blvd
		Bucharest 1, Romania
		Fax: 401-231-4022                                     
		e-mail: cdt@art.ro

Non-presenters are also invited to attend the conference and join in
the post-Congress Dracula tours in Romania.

------------------

CONGRESS COSTS

[The following information has been supplied by the Transylvanian Society
of Dracula in Romania who are organizing the Congress and the
post-Congress tours. The owner of this web site accepts no responsibility
for the accuracy of this information For more details and/or to make
reservations, contact the TSD in Romania directly: fax 401-231-4022 or
e-mail ctd@art.ro]

TRAVEL TO & FROM ROMANIA

The TSD in Romania is presently negotiating with a couple of airlines for
special Congress rates. Information will be added here as soon as it is
available.


THE CONGRESS

Dates: 25-28 May 2000. 
Location: Poiana Brasov, Transylvania, Romania

COSTS: (all are in U.S. dollars and will  have to be paid in advance to
the TSD in Romania)

Congress fee - $100 (waived for paid-up members of the Transylvanian
Society of Dracula)

Travel (costs are approximate and subject to minor changes)

Bucharest airport to departure site or hotel - $20
Bucharest-Poiana Brasov: train - $20; plus $20 for taxi 
Travel by private car, Bucharest-Poiana Brasov - $150 (this can be shared
among 4-5 participants)
Bucharest-Poiana Brasov, by coach or minibus, minimum 5 persons - $50

Bed & breakfast in Poiana Brasov: $50 (sharing a double); single
supplement $15 per day

Return to Bucharest (for those not taking a post-Congress tour): as above.

-------------------

POST-CONGRESS TOURS

A choice of 3 post-Congress tours is offered for those who wish to extend
their visit and see some of Romania's Dracula-related sites.

1. The Myth of the Vampire (3 days, visiting sites associated with
Stoker's Dracula including Bistritz and the Borgo Pass)

2. The Historical Dracula - Vlad the Impaler (3 days, visiting Sighisoara,
Targoviste, Poenari, Arefu and Bucharest)

3. Combination of 1 and 2 (7 days, including the above plus Sinaia and
Snagov)


Further details will be added as they become available. For more 
information and/or reservations, contact the Transylvanian Society of
Dracula in Romania at cdt@art.ro or fax 401- 231-4022.







Check back to this page periodically for updates.
