AWARDS for REFLECTIONS ON DRACULA

The Transylvanian Society of Dracula in Romania has given this book its
Count Dracula Award for the Best Dracula/Vampire Book of the Centennial
Year (1997).


------------------------------

ENDORSEMENTS for REFLECTIONS ON DRACULA


"Elizabeth Miller is one of the world's premier experts on the historical
and fictional Draculas. Her insight on the two have greatly influenced my
own work."  (Jeanne Kalogridis, author)


"Elizabeth Miller is one of those rare scholars whose expertise is infused
with an infectious enthusiasm and a sly Canadian humor. Her work is not
only a pleasure to read but also provides some of the most cogent remarks
on Stoker's work available in the current flood of Dracula studies."
(Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, author)


"A learned, witty and satisfying set of reflections on the infamous
non-reflecting Count. While Elizabeth and I do not always see 'eye-to-eye'
on certain historical matters, her views are invariably stimulating."
(Raymond T. McNally, author/historian)


----------------------------

REVIEWS of REFLECTIONS ON DRACULA


REVIEW in Voices from the Vaults (Newsletter of the Dracula Society,
London), Spring 1999

Professor Miller's preface to these essays states that they are
"independent commentaries on Stoker's novel and its far-reaching
influences since its publication ... ranging from a scholarly assessment
of the connection between Stoker's Count and the historical Dracula, to
... personal anecdotes and observations about life as a Dracula
enthusiast." Five of them focus on aspects of the novel itself, making
this truly a collection with ‘something for everyone'. The bibliography
alone makes this book an excellent reference work and source for further
exploration.

Whether your interest in Dracula is literary, cultural, historical,
geographical or any combination of the above, there is a well-documented
and extremely readable essay on some aspect of Stoker's creation which
will inspire and entertain. The first essay admirably summarizes the
current critical position on just how much the character of Dracula is
based on the historical Vlad Tepes. Professor Miller lays out the evidence
and quotes extensively from all the other established critical viewpoints
- putting her own case in a very persuasive way! Just as refreshing is her
account of her experiences in ‘Draculand' - Dublin, Whitby, London and
Romania. I have not encountered anything else in print which sums up so
well the ambivalence felt by historians, and cultural and tourist
organizations in Romania, towards Western interest in Dracula. Other
chapters of particular interest (to this reviewer) draw parallels between
Dracula and Shakespeare; examine the various editions and versions of
Stoker's text; and look at the many links between Dracula and
Frankenstein.

Combining sound critical analysis with an enthusiasm which fairly leaps
from the page, this is a collection diverse enough to offer new insights
into reading the text of Stoker's novel, as well as providing a
fascinating cultural context to the enduring image of vampires in general,
and Dracula in particular.

----

REVIEW By Anne Fraser (librarian, University of Toronto)

(posted to internet group vampyres@the-institute.net)

Reflections on Dracula:  Ten Essays.  by Elizabeth Miller.  White Rock,
B.C.:  Transylvania Press, 1997, ISBN:  1-55135-004-1

Now *here* is a book that's good to the last drop!  The long-awaited
group of essays authored by Professor Elizabeth Miller (Bloofer to her
friends) on her studies of _Dracula_.  There is a short preface,
acknowledging all the help Prof. Miller received during building this
book, and then we are taken straight to the goodies.  The first chapter
is an expansion of her arguments for the divorce of Count Dracula from
Vlad Tepes that was the highlight of Dracula 97 in L.A. last August.  As
with each successive essay, it is thoroughly researched and
entertainingly written.  You will most likely come away convinced.

"Has Dracula Lost His Fangs?", co-written with Margaret L. Carter, is a
discussion of the evolution of modern vampire literature.  I certainly
was taking notes as to which books to go out and read!  While I don't
necessarily agree that the modern literary sympathetic vampire is
"fangless", it is interesting to see how heavily the pendulum has swung in
that direction in a century. "Typing Transylvania" and "Adventures in
Draculand" both offer us fascinating glimpses of Romania and its
perception of the Dracula phenonmenon, while "Life As a Dracula
Afficiondo" gives us an even more fascinating glimpse into what
it means to be Elizabeth Miller! "She looks like somebody's mother",
indeed!  

There are also essays on the vampire hunters, on the various
editions of _Dracula_ the novel and on sequels, prequels and re-writings
by other authors, a chapter on _Dracula_ and _Frankenstein_, one on
Shakespeare. The last essay deals with Dracula's continuing appeal and the
furtherance of scholarly inquiries into the text and the vampire legend.
There is an extensive bibliography at the end, which should send several
scholars leaping to their local library.

Get this book.  Read this book.  A few typographical errors aside, it's
the best read I've had in a long time.


----

Review posted on internet by Cathy Krusberg
[A version of this review will appear in _The Vampire's 
Crypt_ 19 (Spring 1999). The Vampire's Crypt web site is: 
http://members.aol.com/MLCVamp/vampcrpt.htm]


Elizabeth Miller. Reflections on Dracula: Ten Essays. White
Rock, B.C., Canada: Transylvania Press, 1997; ISBN
1-55135-004-1; $25.00/$35.00. Trade paperback, 226 pp. 

In this collection of essays, Dracula scholar Elizabeth
Miller (aka Bloofer) explores various aspects of *the* vampire
text, Stoker's classic novel -- not only the novel itself, but
its historical context, literary descendants, and resonances in
scholarship and popular culture today.

The first gauntlet that Miller takes up is of course "Vlad Tepes
vs. Count Dracula," i.e., the historical versus the literary
Dracula. As she observes, there has been so much championing of
the connection between Vlad Tepes and Count Dracula that "it has
become increasingly difficult to separate fact from fiction."
This first article reviews sources that perpetuate the unfounded
belief that Stoker based his character on extensive knowledge of
the historical Dracula, then details evidence for Stoker's 
near-total ignorance of his fictional character's historical
namesake. Miller explains how seemingly corroborating evidence
points not to Stoker's familiarity with the historical Vlad, but
to Stoker's other sources. For example, the fictional Count's
appearance has some similarities to that of the historical
Dracula, but more to conventional portrayals of Gothic villains.

The text of DRACULA itself gets a good close look in "The
Fearless Vampire Hunters," an analysis of the novel's
protagonists. Miller examines the roles that the various
"vampire hunters" play, taking an often cynical and ultimately
deconstructive look at the novel's heroes: Jonathan Harker, who
disobeys his host's injunctions and, in England, shows a lack of
concern for Dracula's rights under the law; Seward, whose
unwillingness to synthesize data nearly precipitates a disaster
for the whole anti-vampire crew; Arthur and Quincey as nearly
superfluous clones ("Tweedledee and Tweedledum"); Van Helsing,
a scholar, psychic researcher, and detective imbued with all
forms of learning except self-analysis -- a bundle of
contradictions with a Machiavellian streak; and Mina, in effect
the most important vampire hunter of all, who assembles the
group's documents and manifests more common sense than the rest
put together. In fact, Miller explains how the text itself is a
vampire hunter; its power is shown by Dracula's efforts to
destroy it. 

Several chapters of REFLECTIONS are in effect on spinoffs of
DRACULA. "Shape-Shifting Text: Editions and Versions of Dracula"
looks at everything from minor differences in early editions of
DRACULA to adaptations for children to the discrepancies in
movie versions. Miller examines the pervasiveness of these last,
noting that some lines from them have virtually taken on lives
of their own, and that Dracula of the silver screen is usually
dispatched by some means other than that shown in the novel.
This chapter also examines fictional prequels, sequels, and
attempts to fill in blanks in Stoker's magnum opus. Spinning
still further away, though by no means out of orbit, are
chapters on such topics as Transylvania (in Stoker's time and
now), geographical locations associated with DRACULA, parallels
between DRACULA and FRANKENSTEIN, reverberations of Shakespeare
in DRACULA, and of course an examination of the appeal of the
vampire in general and Dracula in particular. 

Nor does Miller ignore the Count's more distant literary kin. In
"Has Dracula Lost His Fangs?" scholar and author Margaret L.
Carter contributes an essay on the shift away from portrayal of
fictional vampires as purely evil beings, examining
reinterpretations by Fred Saberhagen, Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, and
Suzy McKee Charnas (THE VAMPIRE TAPESTRY). Carter shows how
"these authors present alienness as a positive quality, an
opportunity" for the reader to adopt a different perspective.
Balanced against Carter's good guy vampires is Miller's essay,
which not only notes that the evil Dracula-style vampire is 
far from dead but details why such stereotypes continue to be
effective. Miller briefly describes three notable examples of
this type: 'SALEM'S LOT, THEY THIRST, and "Voivode," a short
story by Douglas Borton.

Miller literally injects a bit of herself into her book with a
chapter on "Life As a Dracula Aficionado," which includes
anecdotes about her Dracula T-shirt collection, her use of the
Internet for research and amusement, and her firsthand knowledge
of luminaries in the vampire field. These include Radu Florescu,
his outspoken "other half" Raymond McNally, Count Dracula Fan
Club president Jeanne Youngson, raconteur par excellence Vincent
Hillyer, and DRACULA scholar Clive Leatherdale. Miller comments,
"I thought I knew Stoker's novel -- until I met Clive."

Dracula purists may be disappointed at the amount of space this
book devotes to arguably peripheral topics at the expense of
exploration of Stoker's novel and/or the historical Vlad. There
are, however, many books and articles on Dracula, from annotated
editions of Stoker's novel to books about the historical
character to scholarly journal articles on Dracula both
fictional and historical; some of these last have themselves
been collected into books. In contrast to works with Dracula as
a focus, REFLECTIONS ON DRACULA explores a wide variety of
topics that reflect on DRACULA -- reflect quite favorably on it,
in fact, for only under the aegis of a rich text indeed is it be
possible to assemble topics as diverse as Frankenstein,
Shakespeare, and Clontarf (Stoker's birthplace). This book
reflects on not only Dracula himself or DRACULA itself but its
(or his) far-reaching resonances in our culture, as well as
those of contemporary culture in Stoker's original text. 

Although written by a university professor, REFLECTIONS ON
DRACULA is very lay-readable throughout. By exploring not only
DRACULA itself but sometimes tangentially related topics, it
validates interest in DRACULA for scholars and laymen alike. In
its topics and its style it debunks a number of notions sadly in
need of debunking: that Stoker had extensive knowledge of the
historical Dracula; that DRACULA is an inferior text unworthy of
study; and that books by university professors necessarily show
no sense of humor.

How to obtain this book: The fastest way, which will garner you
an inscription from the author to boot, is by sending check or
money order ($25 US, $35 CDN plus $2.50 S/H) payable to
Elizabeth Miller (NO credit cards) to: Dr. Elizabeth Miller,
Department of English, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St.
John's, NF Canada A1C 5S7. The book is also available from Dark 
Delicacies (http://www.darkdel.com/) and Amazon.com 
(http://www.amazon.com/), both of which accept plastic money.


Cathy Krusberg
Internet: ckberg@ix.netcom.com

----


REVIEW in "Marginalia: Bulletin d'Information sur les Etudes
Paralitteraires", No. 18, May 1998

(excerpted from the original French with translation)

Au sommaire, pas de pretentiueses etudes ... mais 10 textes plutot
sympathetiques et agreables a lire. Elizabeth Miller attaque 
courageusement a la problematique filiation entre Vlad Tepes et le Comte
de Stoker. Enterprise delicate, car les deux principaux responsables de la
creation de ce "mythe", Radu Florescu et Raymond McNally sont de bons amis
de l'auteur. Une bataille d'idee a suivre, mais je suis pleinement du cote
de l'iconoclaste Elizabeth Miller dans ce combat titanesque, probablement
perdu d'avance! (Norbert Spehner)

[In summary, not pretentious studies but ten pieces both sympathetic and
pleasurable to read. Elizabeth Miller bravely attacks the problematic
connection between Vlad Tepes and Stoker's Count. This is a delicate
undertaking, for the two leading people responsible for creating this
"myth", Radu Florescu and Raymond McNally, are good friends of the author.
A battle of ideas to follow, but I am fully on the side of the
iconoclast Elizabeth Miller in this great debate - probably lost already.]

----

Review posted on www.amazon.com
by Prof Lloyd Worley, University of Northern Colorado

Scholarly, yet written in a clear and fresh style, the first chapter alone
is worth the price of the book. Dr. Miller's book, while always personal,
is fully reliable as she discusses the history of Vlad II and Stoker's
vampire count, as well as her own experiences and research as a "vampire
expert." Humorous, fresh, interesting, accurate, filled with sharp 
observations about society and DRACULA, beginning vampire readers will
want this book...and "old-timers" MUST have it. Very highly recommended.

----

Review posted on amazon.com and on Free Gallery of Authors' Voices
(http://fregalry.interspeed.net)
by Norine Dresser, author of AMERICAN VAMPIRES

Professor Miller's work fills in the gaps of previous Dracula
scholarship. Her book is both enlightening and entertaining, and no reader
will yawn over these insightful , lively essays.


----

Commentary posted by Inanna Arthen (Vyrdolak) on "Real Vampires" homepage
[http://www.net1plus.com/users/vyrdolak/realvamp.htm]


Dr. Elizabeth Miller is an authority on Bram Stoker and his novel,
DRACULA. Among her radical stands is a firm rejection of the highly
popularized idea that Stoker "based his fictional character" on the
historical Wallachian prince, Vlad Dracula. In this book of essays, Dr.
Miller presents her convincing case for the minority view, along with
entertaining and informative thoughts about Transylvania and its
stereotypes, vampire fandom and the Internet, related literature, analyses
of the novel and her own experiences as a Stoker scholar. Eminently
readable and recommended for any serious "Dracula" afficionado. Don't call
him Vlad!

----------------------------------
