Here is a list of DRACULA movies. After each, I have given my own 
personal rating - in fangs!  Scale: 4 fangs is a MUST. Rent it tonight! 3 
is fairly good - worth seeing! 2 - OK though with some reservations. 1 
fang - mediocre. Spend your money on pizza - with garlic!


Please note that this list is BY NO MEANS complete! I just include a few
movies which I have seen. For a more COMPLETE list of Dracula and vampire
movies, I refer you to J. Gordon Melton's new book, _VideoHound's Vampires
on Video_. It lists and includes commentaries on over 600 films and
documentaries.

---------------------

NOSFERATU (1922)  V V V V                                
Black & white, silent. The Murnau classic starring Max Schreck. 
And yes, that WAS his real name, coincidental though it may be 
("Schreck" is German for "terror")! Even if you don't like silent films, 
you should see this one. The use of shadows for effect has never been 
better! You'll recognize some elements borrowed by Coppola for BRAM 
STOKER'S DRACULA. [As a note of interest. The term "nosferatu" was 
borrowed from Stoker's novel where it is used by Van Helsing. Stoker in 
turn borrowed it from Emily Gerard's article "Transylvanian 
Superstitions" (1885). Contrary to popular belief, the word is not 
Romanian for "vampire"!]                                 

DRACULA (1931)  V V V
This is the Universal Studios version starring Bela Lugosi. Judged on its 
own merit, it probably is not worth three fangs. But it was so 
influential in forming a cultural image of Count Dracula for the 20th 
century that it has become a classic. And Lugosi's accent is - well, 
spooky! The best scenes in the movie come early (Dracula's castle). It's 
downhill after that!

ABBOTT AND COSTELLO MEET FRANKENSTEIN (1946) V V 
In spite of the title, this is as much a Dracula movie as a Frankenstein one.
A good spoof, guaranteed to raise a few laughs. The warehouse scenes are 
hilarious, though the comedy does wear a bit thin in the latter part of 
the movie. Worth seeing, though!

HORROR OF DRACULA (1958) V V
This was the first Hammer film based on the Count - and by no means the 
last! The first appearance of Christopher Lee and Peter Cushing as 
Dracula and Van Helsing respectively. Even though these two actors 
defined these roles for the next decade, I still give this movie just 2 
fangs. I just don't like what they do with the story.

COUNT DRACULA (1970) V V 1/2
Also starring Christopher Lee, the best of his portrayals of the Count. 
While the plot line is rather plodding, it does follow the novel 
somewhat! What I like about it is Lee - he actually looks like Stoker's 
Dracula in this one. Not really a 3-fang movie bit a little better than a 2!

DRACULA [or BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA] (1974) V V 
This one stars Jack Palance (with lots of heavy breathing). An average 
movie, but one thing I liked about it was the brief connection that was 
made between Count Dracula and Vlad the Impaler. No, Coppola's movie was 
NOT the first to do this, nor the first to use the "portrait of his 
long-lost love" motif. FFC was obviously much indebted to this one.

COUNT DRACULA (1978) V V V
Made for TV (BBC), this one stars Louis Jourdan as the Count. Even though 
it has its limitations (too obviously made for TV), it has merit as 
probably the closest of all the Dracula movies to the plot of Stoker's 
novel. I'm not too keen on Jourdan as Dracula, but the shots done on 
location at Whitby (with Mina and Lucy) put the movie up near the top of 
the list of my favorites.

LOVE AT FIRST BITE (1979) V V V
The best of the Dracula comedies. Stars George Hamilton as the Count who
is driven from his Transylvanian castle and moves to New York. The movie 
has some of my favorite lines! [Do you know that at one time, since this 
movie came out, Hamilton was denied a visa to enter Romania? Hmmmm....]

DRACULA (1979) V V
In spite of the fact that Frank Langella makes a sexy, seductive 
Dracula (a la Byron), the movie is second-rate. I hate what they do to the 
plot and the characters, and Laurence Olivier is very forgettable as 
Van Helsing.

NOSFERATU (1979) V V V
My, 1979 WAS a big year! This is one of my favorite Dracula movies! A 
remake of the 1922 classic, it is slow (in a powerful way) and 
wonderfully haunting. Klaus Kinski gives an unforgettable performance as 
the vampire who is "conned" by a woman into staying up until sunrise! (We 
all know what happens then - even though in Stoker's novel, Count Dracula 
moves around freely during the daytime albeit with diminished powers.)

BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA (1992) V V V V
Coppola's rendering of the Dracula story is one of my favorites. I know 
that many do not agree with me on this but hey, it's a free country! :) 
I KNOW the script takes liberties with Stoker's novel (don't they 
all?) and maybe it should not have been titled BRAM STOKER'S Dracula. But 
as a movie, it is great! It combines the text, a bit of history (albeit 
distorted in typically post-modern fashion) and influences of earlier 
Dracula movies with superb costumes and a marvellous soundtrack.

DRACULA: DEAD AND LOVING IT (1995) V 1/2
I would only give it somewhere between one fang and two. While it did 
have its moments (I loved the argument clinic that Dr. Seward conducted 
with Renfield!), but for the most part it was weak. Much of the humor was 
overstated and predictable. 



