INTERVIEW I did with the editor, "Legacy of the Dragon" (publication date:
unknown).


Question: Do you believe in the existence of supernatural creatures
(ghosts, witches, vampires, werewolves)?

MILLER: The answer is no, I do not believe in supernatural creatures. I am
not saying categorically that they do not exist; what I am saying is that
I do not believe that they exist. I say this in the absence of any
personal experience or encounter, and the failure of anyone else to
convince me otherwise. As for vampires, I do not believe that they exist
as supernatural beings. However, if one defines a vampire as a person with
a craving for blood (without the supernatural powers), then of course
they do exist. But I am sure there are many people out there who would
like to be vampires in the supernatural sense, or who even believe that
they are! When I use the word "vampire" in my own work, I am referring to
the traditional definition, the bloodsucker who is endowed with
immortality and supernatural powers.


Question: Do you have other interests in horror besides Dracula and
vampires?

MILLER: First I should explain just what my interest in Dracula and
vampires actually is. I am a scholar whose interest in Dracula is
academic. First and foremost there is the novel itself, one of the most
influential books ever written. As a professor of literature, I am
interested in how it came about, its author, and its aftermath as an
influence on literature and popular culture. Another area in which I have
done considerable research is the historical Dracula - Vlad Tepes - whose
name Bram Stoker borrowed for his vampire Count. I am especially
interested in the Romanian connection: how Romanians view the two Draculas
and the contrast between Western and Romanian perceptions.

While my interest is primarily in Dracula, this naturally expands to the
vampire figure in general, including the vampire of folklore, vampires in
literature, and vampires in popular culture. As for other horror
interests, I am quite fascinated by the Frankenstein story, especially as
originally presented in Mary Shelley's novel. And I like to read the
novels of Stephen King.


Question: When and how was your interest sparked?

MILLER: While I used to watch Dracula movies many years ago (including
Lugosi and Lee), my serious interest in this subject is relatively new. I
had been working on the British Romantic poets (Byron and Shelley) and
became drawn to "Frankenstein". Then I decided to explore the lesser known
writer of that group, Byron's physician John Polidori who wrote the first
piece of vampire fiction in English Literature ("The Vampyre"). I traced
this down through the 19th century culminating in "Dracula" - and I was
hooked! I have been doing serious study of the Dracula phenomenon for
about 5 years, during which time I have lectured on it at many
conferences both in North America and Europe, including the World
Dracula Congress (Romania), the Bram Stoker Summer School (Dublin) and
the International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts (Ft Lauderdale
FL). I also teach _Dracula_ regularly in my courses at university. And I
am in the process of finishing a book about Dracula entitled _Reflections
on Dracula_ to be published in 1997.


Question: Why is the vampire myth so universal? Why are vampires so
popular today?

MILLER: The fact that almost every culture has a version of the vampire
myth suggests that the archetype addresses some deeply rooted fears and/or
yearnings. There are many factors operating here: the attraction to the
dark side of our natures; the fascination with what is forbidden; the
desire for eternal youth and immortality; the centrality of blood in a
religious sense. Add to these the sexual seductiveness and power that
have come to be a part of the vampire image and you have a potent
combination! I think this latter factor explains much of the popularity
of the vampire today, as well as the desire of many young people in
particular to live this alternative lifestyle. Being a "vampire" (or a
Goth, for that matter) is for today's youth what being a "hippie" was for
the youth of the 60s.

The vampire figure has survived in literature and popular culture for
another reason. It is a versatile archetype, and can be shaped and
re-shaped to fit any individual artist's own vision. So while we still
encounter fictional vampires who are spawns of Satan (as Stoker presented
Dracula), we also have vampires who are more ambivalent or even basically
good. Vampires have invaded every walk of life: they are detectives,
policemen, doctors, professors, etc. If Bram Stoker could come back
today, he would be absolutely amazed!


Question: Do you watch vampire movies?

MILLER: Oh yes! I have watched every major Dracula movie ever made,
including some very bad ones. I think the worst one has to be "Dracula's
Dog" - it sucks!! My favorites are the 2 versions of "Nosferatu" (1922,
1979) and the Coppola film "Bram Stoker's Dracula". However, the one that
is closest to Bram Stoker's novel would have to be "Count Dracula"
starring Louis Jourdan, made for BBC-TV in the late 1970s. I also enjoy
vampire movies in general. My favorites? "Dance of the Damned" and "Fright
Night" would be on the top of my list.

Then there are vampire novels - hundreds of them. I read as many as I get
time for. My favorite authors are Chelsea Quinn Yarbro and Jeanne
Kalogridis. Also high on my list are the two Kim Newman books (especially
"Anno Dracula"), Stephen King's "Salem's Lot". I have a few others listed
on my Dracula home page (along with other items that might interest your
readers). Check it out at http://www.ucs.mun.ca/~emiller/


Question:

Do you do anything special for Halloween? Do you decorate your home to
reflect your interests?

MILLER: I try to make myself scarce during the Halloween period. It is the
one time of year when the media suddenly become interested in the subject,
and I usually get 4-5 requests for radio and/or television appearances.
I don't mind doing that (in fact I enjoy it) but I get a little weary of
interviewers who trivialize it and keep repeating the same stale lines
(eg. "Should I wear a crucifix while interviewing you?") I have found
that my most successful interviews are those that have not been connected
with Halloween. By the way, I don't dress up myself but I must confess
that I am most generous to those "trick-or-treaters" who come to my door
dressed as Dracula/vampires! As far as decorating my home - no. But my
office at the university has a number of Dracula-related items: a huge
poster of 100 uncut cards for the Coppola movie, a few souvenirs of Vlad
Tepes from Romania, etc.


Question: How are you treated by your peers?

MILLER: My colleagues at university generally respect what I am doing,
because they know that my interest is scholarly. Now, I must confess that
I do have a bit of fun with the stuff as well. It is very rare to be able
to find a field of research that can also be so enjoyable. I love it! And
my colleagues seem to appreciate that. I do, however, get strange looks
from others who ask me what my area of expertise is. When I say "Dracula",
the response is frequently laughter. Once I was interviewed on TV and the
host said, "She looks like she could be anyone's mother, but in fact
she's a Dracula scholar". That says it all!


Question: What is Transylvania like?

MILLER: Transylvania is part of the country of Romania. It is known to us
in the West primarily because of its connection with Dracula and vampires,
a connection due to Bram Stoker's novel. It puzzles people in Transylvania
because to them Dracula is the historical figure Vlad Tepes (who was not
a vampire); the Western concepts of Dracula and vampires are foreign to
them. But Dracula fans are drawn to Transylvania to see the sites
mentioned in Stoker's novel, especially Bistritz and the Borgo Pass. If
anyone is interested in details about my trips to Transylvania, I suggest
you browse through my home page which has plenty of stuff about it.


(the end)
--------------------------
