Interviewer: Steve Wieland, Sacramento Bee for article which appeared
October 28, 1997.
Interviewee: Elizabeth Miller

1. How familiar was Stoker with the Vlad Tepes stories when he wrote his
novel? What other influences affected his work? Is there any hard
evidence he knew of Elizabeth Bathory, and mixed her story with Vlad Tepes?


MILLER: Here is what we know for sure. During the summer of 1890 while
vacationing in Whitby, Stoker came across a book in the Public Library
entitled _An Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia_
(1820) by William Wilkinson. In it there is a short section about a
"voivode Dracula" who fought against the Turks in the 15th century. Stoker
copied much of this section into his notes (now held at the Rosenbach
Museum in Philadelphia), including a footnote Wilkinson made to the effect
that "Dracula in the Wallachian language means Devil". That, in my
opinion, is why he selected the name. He had already selected a name for
his vampire (Count Wampyr) but at some point after the Whitby visit, he
changed it to Count Dracula.

There is nothing in Wilkinson about Vlad's atrocities as "the Impaler" (in
fact, the name Vlad and the sobriquet "Impaler" are never used). And there
is no evidence that Stoker obtained additional material on the historical
Dracula from any other source. There is plenty of speculation, but that is
all it is. Thus, to say that Stoker was influenced by accounts of Vlad in
creating his character is misleading.

As for "hard evidence" that he knew of the Bathory legend, there is even
less. One book that we know he consulted (he was kind enough to list his
sources in his Notes) was _The Book of Were-Wolves_ by Sabine
Baring-Gould; that book does contain a short section on Countess Bathory.
But the notes Stoker took do not include any from this section, and her
name appears nowhere in his drafts or notes. Again, there are theories,
but that is all that they are.

There are other theories about influences, one of the chief being that
Stoker based Count Dracula on his employer, Henry Irving. According to
this view, Stoker was indirectly expressing his resentment at being
dominated by Irving in the workplace. But again, the available evidence
contradicts this. Everything Stoker wrote about Irving (and there is
plenty) is laudatory.

The influences that we know of (because of textual evidence or references
in his own notes) include earlier vampire fiction, most notably Le Fanu's
"Carmilla". We also have that list of books and articles which he
consulted during his research for information on Transylvania in
particular.



2.At the time of publication, what was the public response? In terms of
literary quality, how does it rate as a Gothic novel?

MILLER: The book did attract some attention, but only as a "thriller". No
reviews of the time draw attention to the sexual subtext. It seems to have
sold reasonably well, but Stoker never made a great deal of money from it.
The novel didn't really capture the popular imagination until after the
movies started to come out (especially the 1931 version with Bela Lugosi).

The book did not receive much scholarly attention until the 1970s. The
debate about the "literary canon" has resulted in an increased interest
among academics in novels (such as gothic novels) that were previously
marginalized as "inferior". In the past 10 years or so, there has been a
significant output of books and articles on _Dracula_, many of which offer
readings of the novel ranging from psychoanalytical to post-colonialist.

_Dracula_ has never been out of print since it was first published in
1897. Dozens of editions have appeared, both in English and in several
foreign languages. The novel has created a literary archetype as well as a
popular icon.


3. Given that the Count is really not in the book very much, how is it
that the character has become so enduring a part of literature, plays and
films, not to mention popular culture that stretches from breakfast cereals to
pornography?

MILLER: There are many reasons, most of which are connected with the
vampire figure itself. Vampires represent many things to different people:
immortality, forbidden desires, rebellion, power, eroticism, etc. Unlike
other "monsters", vampires attract as well as repel; and they are in many
ways so much like us. Add that to the general fascination with the darker
side of our natures, with the supernatural, and with the nature of evil,
and you have the fascination with Count Dracula.

One major reason that Dracula has survived is his adaptability. He is,
after all, a shape-shifter. Writers, artists, filmmakers and others have
done creative new things with the vampire in general and Dracula in
particular. Every generation creates its own Count Dracula, reflecting the
fears, anxieties and fantasies of its own time.

I am especially intrigued about how the Dracula story has been adapted for
young children. For example, there is a series of books written for
primary-aged children with titles such as "Little Dracula Goes to School",
"Little Dracula at the Seashore" and "Little Dracula's First Bite"! And of
course we have the Count on Sesame Street.


4. Does the character have different appeals for men than women?

MILLER: I suppose it depends on how one reads the novel and whether we
want to apply gender stereotypes to readers. One could say, I suppose,
that a man might read it more as an adventure story while a woman would
see it as more threatening. It has been suggested that the novel is a
Victorian male fantasy, with a powerful male figure who can turn passive
females into sexually ravenous beasts. Some women, on the other hand, may
see the text as misogynist in its numerous allusions to virile males and
weak females.


5. Dracula is a Middle European character concocted by an Irishman. What
then, is there about him that makes him such a mythic and universal
figure in cultures as diverse as Mexico and Japan?

MILLER: I think I have partially answered this. Obviously the answer is in
the power of the archetype, the fact that Stoker (whether consciously or
not) succeeded in tapping into a universal theme. The novel is much more
than a cultural phenomenon; it is archetypal.


6. One of the essays in your forthcoming collection is entitled "Dracula
and Shakespeare." Can you give me a summary of what you cover in this?

MILLER: When one considers that Stoker worked for several years as acting
manager for the Lyceum Theatre and that his employer was the famous
Shakespearean actor Henry Irving, it is not surprising that there are so
many echoes of Shakespearean plays in the novel. Stoker saw dozens (even
hundreds) of performances of plays such as _Hamlet_ and _Macbeth_. The
novel _Dracula_ contains direct quotations as well as resonances and
patterns familiar to any student of Shakespeare.


7. How did you get interested in this guy?

MILLER: I did see Dracula movies while I was growing up, and had even read
the book at one point. But I had no particular interest in it all until
much later. For several years I had been teaching a university course on
the Romantic Poets (Byron, Shelley & Keats) and was looking around for new
material. I tried using Mary Shelley's _Frankenstein_ and Polidori's "The
Vampyre" and found the course enriched as a result. Then I followed the
vampire's literary trail through the 19th century and ended up with Bram
Stoker. I was hooked! That was about 6 years ago, and I have been working
on the novel and its widespread influence ever since.

--------------
