INTERVIEW that I did with Virginia Wilcox. Article published in "The
Herald" (Rock Hill, SC)



QUESTION: "Dracula" is considered by many the touchstone for vampire
literature. What impact did Bram Stoker have on the horror genre with the
creation of "Dracula"? And how well did he understand that impact?

MILLER: To answer the second part first, Stoker had no idea of the impact
his novel would make. To begin with, it was only fairly popular in his own
day (and with non-intellectual readers), and was seen by reviewers as just
a story of horror and the supernatural. What brought _Dracula_ to the
foreground was the movie industry. Stoker did not live long enough to
enjoy the fruits of that popularity.

_Dracula_ is indeed the touchstone of vampire literature and has become
the yardstick by which every vampire story is measured. Part of this is
because it came at the "right" time. There had been other vampire stories
before Stoker's (starting with John Polidori's "The Vampyre" in 1819 and
throughout the 19th century) and Stoker drew the various threads together.
Another factor is the time at which it was written - late Victorian
England, end-of-century anxiety, latent sexuality, etc. One of the reasons
the novel has received so much attention from late 20th century literary
critics is that it opens a window on to the world of late Victorian
England. This is no doubt something we can note in retrospect rather than
something Stoker himself would have been aware of.

As for the impact, it is difficult to measure it. The novel is the most
enduring of all classic Gothic fiction (with _Frankenstein_ probably
ranking second). The fact that it has never gone out of print, has been
brought out in endless editions, has been translated into dozens of
foreign languages (including Romanian), has been the subject of
revisionist writings, prequels and sequels, of movies, drama, ballets,
musicals, children's books, etc. attests to its endurance. Stoker would be
amazed to know that he created a modern myth and that just about every
single person in the Western world knows something about "Dracula". How
many other fictional characters can make such a claim?


QUESTION: How would "Dracula" be different if Stoker were writing it in 1997
instead of 1897?

MILLER: Of course, any answer would be speculative. One thing that strikes
me about the 1897 novel is the method of narration: Stoker uses what would
have been contemporary technologies of communication - shorthand,
phonograph recordings, typewriting and duplicationg. Were he writing it in
1997, the format might have been faxes, email, web sites and answering
machines! But the anxieties might have been different - or more explicitly
expressed. One enduring quality of the book is that it actually does speak
to our anxieties. Vampirism can be read today as a metaphor for AIDS, for
example.


QUESTION: Why are we, as readers, so fascinated with the vampire? Why is he
successful has a literary character?

MILLER: Much of the answer lies in the vampire itself. No other monster
has the same enduring (endearing?) qualitites. Look at all it can
represent - power, immortality, dabbling with taboo, defiance of
authority, sensuality, seductiveness, ability to defy natural law. All in
one creature. Wow!


QUESTION: Prior to the 1970s, I believe, most vampire stories and novels were
simply retellings of Stoker's work. In the last 20 years, there has 
been a proliferation of vampire fiction. Why do you think this is?

MILLER: True. I think writers began to see the immense possibilities. The
social revolution of the 60s opened up new possibilities. The blurring of
traditional boundaries between good and evil lent a new ambivalence to teh
vampire who starts to show up as a misunderstood and even romantic figure.
While Rice is often credited as the one who changed the direction, equally
significent are Fred Saberhagen (whose "Dracula Tape" retold Stoker's
novel from Dracula's point of view) and Chelsea Quinn Yarbro whose vampire
is heroic rather than villainous.

Some have opted to stay with the Stokerian vampire concept, however.
Stephen King's "Salem's Lot" is a case in point.


QUESTION: Many authors have been content to continue in the tradition carved out
by Stoker. Others have chosen to extend vampire mythology. Which authors,
in your opinion, have done the most to extend the vampire genre? And how
have they accomplished this?

MILLER: Partially answered above. As for extending the genre, there is of
course Anne Rice. Also Yarbro, Suzy McKee Charnas, Poppy Z. Brite, and
many more.


QUESTION: What role does the historical Dracula play in this growing 
fascination with vampires? How strong is his presence in modern works?

MILLER: I think the revelation that there was a real Dracula (1972)
increased scholarly interest in the whole subject. (It certainly did that
for me). And it has had some impact on fiction. A number of writers have
written a pre-history for Count Dracula based on the historical Vlad Tepes
- best of these is a trilogy by Jeanne Kalogridis. I have strong views
about the actual connection between the two Draculas which I spell out in
my Foreword to Kalogridis' latest novel _Lord of the Vampires_ (1996).

But I don't think the history has affected the contemporary interest in
vampires in general all that much. That is much more a product of vampire
novels and movies, as well as the Goth scene (about which I do not know
too much).


--------------------
