This interview was done by Pablo Gosse of the MUSE (student newspaper of
Memorial University of Newfoundland) with JOHN CROSSEN, a doctoral student at
the University of Indiana and is reprinted here with permission.



 1.  Why do you think that society as a whole has become so fascinated with
     a subject which is so violent, and whose roots are grounded in
     something even more violent?

Personally, I think "society" has always been violent and fascinated by
violence in all forms. As a scripture scholar (I have an M.Div. from Saint
Thomas Theological Seminary), I am struck by the nasty imagery in such
holy writ as Judges, Judith, Joshua, even Genesis. Before "splatter
films", there was the very cinematic Barak driving the tent peg into the
forehead of Jael, or blood-smeared Judith waving the severed head of
Holofernes above the excited Hebrews. Even the Crucifixion has fascinated
iconographers and artists since the Middle Ages. Some of those bloody
crucifixes were really bloody at about the time Vlad was having a grand
time in Wallachia. I documented this in my paper for DRACULA 97. Medieval
society, like our own, was awash in gory imagery--it was cathartic and yet
sublime... Calling us outside of ourselves, our petty concerns with its
brutal slap to our sensibilities. If we will not swoon before the glories
of Heaven, then we will shudder before the horrors of Hell.

Now, today, why do we gawk at auto accidents? Why must we see the slit
throat of Nicole Simpson? The suffering of others has always transfixed
us. If we seem more obsessed, I think it's really because technology can
deliver those visceral grips to our imagination faster. They fly across
every medium, and yes, the effect can seem dizzying. But it's mostly an
innovation to feed an ancient need more efficiently. I honestly don't
think we're any better or worse on this issue than medieval or older
societies.

As for Dracula, he's so much like us, isn't he? He's just more honest
about bloodletting and bloodsoaking. He's the shadow of ourselves, in cape
or stake in hand, just behind us as we take a peek at that roadkill.
 

2.  Why do you feel that _Dracula_ has maintained such a high level of
    popularity in the 100 years since its publication, and especially in
    the past two decades or so?

As an American, I've long thought he was us--the Ultimate Consumer,
feeding, taking and dominating. He has it all. As David Skal joked at
DRACULA 97, "What's not to like about him? He's the American dream: he's
immortal, forever youthful, dresses in elegant clothes, and has a getaway
castle in Europe." But the Dracula Americans love is not the novelistic
one... It's Lugosi or more accurately, Frank Langella. Most modern folks
would probably find the novel boring after a chapter or two. It's the
idea of Dracula they enjoy. For that, Stoker's character will live on.

On the academic side, the interest in the novel has blossomed in the past
20 years, for sure! My mentor in the English Dept. at Arizona State U,
Alan P. Johnson, a Dracula scholar, once told me he couldn't publish a
thing on the novel in the late 60s, early 70s... He would have been
laughed out of a job. Now, after twenty years of feminist, post-colonial,
dialogic and deconstructive studies of every imaginable stripe, the
novel's sort of become "born again", truly a textbook of every 20th
century obsession, from blood to sex to male-female relations, East vs
West, etc. It's THE study of Degeneracy at every Western cultural level.


3.  To what extent do you feel folklore and superstitions influenced the
     figure which Bram Stoker created?

Oh, very greatly! He obviously knew many of the traits and features of
the folkloric vampire. He was also steeped in symbol, ritual, and other
arcana--possibly from his associations with Golden Dawn member, Hall
Caine, the "Hommy-Beg" to whom he dedicates the novel. Hall, being a
devout Manx and Celt, loved to tell ghost stories and describe every
custom of the country folk in detail... Stoker is clever in how he
immerses us in a totally other world, a plastic one that swirls and
twists about us as Harker heads up into the Carpathians fo his rendezvous
with the King Vampire. He is deliberately summing up every myth and dark
symbol in that opening section. He knew what he was doing.


4.  The vampires of folklore, Stoker's Count Dracula, and the vampires
     presented in modern day literature are vastly different in appearance.
     Why do you think the image of the vampire has changed so much from
     that presented in the folktales from which they developed?  Which do
     you hold to be more representative of the idea of the vampire, and
     why?

Great question! Let me answer the last one first, OK? I'd say the
folkloric one, the one that looks like a real animated corpse. It's more
in line with the medieval mindset, of the cheat of death--of its
hideousness, curse on every sector of society. What a curse to die and
rot and yet still "live"! Whew. The flip side of the art of dying well
that medieval folks in Europe seemed concerned with. This image of the
vampire links us to the earliest origins of vampire mythology.

Why has the image changed? To make Dracula more palatable to a
death-denying culture like ours. We need to keep death as clean-looking,
elegant, and sanitized as we possibly can. If Dracula exudes an odor, it
had better be Chazz for men!

Curious problem I've always wrestled with: In the novel, Harker describes
the Count as real degenerate, a half-beast, with his protruding sharp
teeth, hairy palms, pointed ears, and foul breath. How the heck did this
guy walk about London good as you please, without a single Bobby pulling
him aside for questioning? His physiognomy fits the classic criminal type
for Victorian minds (how many cartoons in Pall Mall Gazette pictured Jack
the Ripper as a total brute). My humble theory is that not only could
Dracula affect and control the elements (wind, lightning, mists) but he
could control our senses, especially as he grew stronger on rich Western
blood.

By the way, got a letter recently from John Badham, the director of the
Langella DRACULA (1979). He originally wanted Mina, Dracula's first
victim, to be even more hideous than what we saw--flesh falling off her
arms, bones exposed, etc. The idea being that Dracula maintains his
boyish looks by drawing all beauty off his victims, corrupting them so
that he may remain incorrupt. A neat lil touch, a conscious effort by the
filmakers to balance the folkloric vampire with the Byronic-Romantic one.


5.  What aspect of the novel do you feel that has drawn people to it?  In
     opposition to this, what do you think draws people to the actual
     historical figure, Vlad Dracula, on which the fictional Dracula is
     based?

Like every good bedtime story, or fairy tale, there is something
forbidden going on under the surface, or in the case of Dracula, under
the sheets. People are titillated by that. I think Stoker was, with those
heaving sighs, tingling necks, and sweet laughter.

As a kid, I was drawn to the battle between good and evil, where science
is more like religion and religion is more like science. I've always
imagined myself Van Helsing. But that's me. More accurately, though, I
wanted to be Cushing's athletic Van Helsing to Lee's athletic Count.

As for Vlad Dracula--that "Dracula" was REAL in some form. Look at how we
run to any piece of "evidence" of UFOs, or Bigfoot, or Men in Black! Deep

down, we want to be reassured that what fascinates us is "real", that
we're not wasting our time dreaming or chasing after fairy tales. A
historical Dracula legitimates all our attention paid... Hey, he really
existed! Let's watch another Hammer Film!>


6.  Why do you feel that so many people feel drawn to the figure of the
     vampire, not only in _Dracula_, but also in the novels of Anne Rice,
     and the myriad of vampire fiction which has surfaced in the latter
     half of this century?

Again, forbidden lifestyles are fascinating... The ability to transgress
the laws of nature and get away with it, perhaps even thrive. What's
forbidden holds our attention. It's always amused me that Satan gets more
press from evangelical Christians who see him everywhere. Folks are drawn
to what attracts (immortality and eternal youth) and repulses (drinking
blood) at the same time. How else to explain President Clinton's
popularity? Just kidding... Not!


7.  What effect do you feel that the popularity of the vampire has had in
     the development of the Goth subculture?

From Anne Rice, Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, PN Elrod, and others, quite a bit!
I don't know about Stoker. Ever notice you never really have a sense of
what his characters are wearing--Dracula is dressed in black, head to
foot... Thanks, Bram, real helpful for my tailor! The Goth folks revel in
textures, of layers of lace, gaudy jewelry, and tasteful black. They're
really quite aesthetic, an arresting presence to the eye. I'd want a Goth
to design my funeral. This concern with "Look", with how they'll appear in
your "Gaze" and hopefully dominate it, characterizes many Goths for me. If
they're "vampires", they're trying to entice our eyes and draw energy from
that. Could be worse, I guess.


8.  Do you have any experience with those involved in the Goth subculture,
     and, if yes, can you provide any insight as to their motives and
     purposes for carrying out such a lifestyle.

There is a small Goth sub-culture here in Bloomington. When I walk down
our college street, Kirkwood, I see more baggy clothes and bare skin with
garish tattoos, not that elegant crowd I had the pleasure of meeting at
DRACULA 97. At the masquerade ball Saturday night, I had the chance to
stroll about, chatting with several. All, with out an exception, were
articulate, bright and quick with their answers, and VERY SERIOUS about
their image. They moaned that the media at DRACULA 97 were purposely
seeking out the "weirdos", the "crazies", those who catered to Americans'
stereotypes of Goths and practicing vampires. One girl, disgusted with
some nut who kept cavorting for the video cameras, cigar in his mouth,
flapping his cape and howling, said, "Look at that mess! See what I mean?
That's what everyone thinks of us--as nuts. Well, we're not. We love to
dress with dignity and style, and differently, but not because we're
psychos." Turned out she was a med student at UCLA!

Rules I picked up: some Goths are vampyres (their preferred spelling), but
not all; some vampyres dress like Goths, but not all. They're a pretty
diverse bunch.

Motives of Goths? From my interviews and observations, I think the main
one is infusing life with dignity--conscious, willed decorum. When they
dress, each element is deliberately placed so and so... for a certain
effect. Goths are folks who love ritual but want it on their own terms, by
their own design. They want to keep each motion, each look within a magic
circle of their own self. They delight in projecting an "excess within
control." It's a fantasy life based on having fun with stuffiness. It's
the lace but no strait-lace! As one lady remarked to me, "I want to return
to the past and bring it here to the present. I am both Victorian and
Modern at once."


9.  What is your opinion of those who claim to be "practicing vampires"?
     Do you feel that their actions are substantiated, or that they could
     conceivably pose a threat to themselves and others?

Yes and yes. Any human behavior lends itself to irrationality, even
criminality. And history certainly has its share of homocidal vampires,
thos excited by the sight of blood, who need to see it spilled, even
taste it--from Erzebet Bathory, the "Blood Countess" (1560-1614), to Peter
Kurten, the "Dusseldorf Vampire" (executed 1930). I don't like the actions
of many so-called "living vampires" (or Sangroids, as one guy in Denver I
insisted I call them, including him)--in this day and age, we just have to
resist random play with body fluids. Still, there is an undeniable
connection between sex and blood, and with care, knowing, in a
responsible, mature (and committed) relationship, it cannot be avoided.
It's important lovers be comfortable with each other's bodies (occasional
blood in sex, too), but not too comfortable! Too much of anything is never
good. And if someone can't get excited sexually unless blood is shed (from
a cut on an arm, what have you), then that is a fixation--and somehow he
or she is locked, unable to grow as a fully mature sexual partner.
Fixations of any sort in life are not healthy. It's the same rule for sex
as with everything: moderation, and balance. Fixation is imbalance.


10. Do you pay any creedence to diseases such as Porphyria and Renfield's
     Syndrome with regard to those who claim to be practicing vampires?

I don't know about porphyria as an appeal or justification for those who
claim to be "practicing vampires", but I imagine it justified a lot of
fools' suspicions in the past--those who are light sensitive, have
unnatural growths of hair, receding gums and thus pronounced teeth, and
are pale, with red-rimmed eyes... Gotta be vampires! Like the Gerasene
Demoniac in Mark and the other Gospels--a wild man, mentally ill,
wandering about cemeteries--gotta be demon possessed, right? Our gaze
(what Jesus lambasted as "Judging by appearances, as men do, not by the
heart, as God does.") has done a lot of violence to others--what that
gaze puts on others, how it fixes them in our fears and insecurities...
and often has condemned them to exile, loneliness, and death. As Foucault
noted, it's the sin of the modern, rational age--the Gaze that sees and
names, and dehumanizes. From hospital to church, it's everywhere.

For me, the greatest evil is the Evil Eye. How folks who've suffered from
porphyria can confirm that!

-------------
