The following article appeared in the "Evening Telegram" (St. John's,
Newfoundland) on October 31, 1997.

-----------

COUNT DRACULA AND ME

by Elizabeth Miller


"She looks as if she could be somebody's mother, but in fact she's a
Dracula expert." This introduction on CBC-TV's "Here and Now" is typical
of reactions I get to my scholarly interest in a late-Victorian
novel. I have been called everything from the harmless (I hope!) "Dr.
Dracula" to the more insidious "disciple of Count Dracula."

As President of the Canadian Chapter of the Transylvanian Society of
Dracula, a historical-cultural organization based in Romania, I am
frequently asked (with a curious blend of humor and unease), "What sort of
people become members?"

My response? The same cross-section you would find in other special
interest groups: professors, students, computer programmers, lawyers,
folklorists, and even a "born-again" Christian. The common link is an
interest in the novel _Dracula_ and its phenomenal influence.

Everyone with an interest in this field, whether as scholar or fan,
encounters stereotypical reactions. Reporters covering international
conferences have been among the worst offenders.

A Bucharest political columnist referred to a scholarly symposium on
Dracula held in Romania in 1996 as a "vampire comedy"; a reporter for the
Irish Times labelled participants in a Bram Stoker conference in Dublin as
"vampire fanatics."

How can one account for such labelling? For some, it is a conditioned
response, shaped by the trivialization that has beset Stoker's novel
primarily as a result of movies.

Typical are the time-worn cliches that have appeared as headlines for
stories about my own work: "She sinks her teeth into her work" (St.
Petersburg Times); "Going batty" (Chicago Tribune); and "Scholar has stake
in Dracula" (Globe and Mail).

But I am not complaining. In all three cases, the accounts were serious, I
was not quoted out of context, and my name was spelled correctly!

I am a bit more concerned about the so-called "link" (played to the hilt
by the American media) between an interest in vampire fiction and aberrant
behavior.

I was in Florida last winter when the infamous "vampire cult"
murders took place near Orlando. Within hours of the breaking news, I
received several phone calls from various media (including NBC-TV in New
York) asking for an interview. Of course, I turned all of them down,
pointing out I am a literary scholar, not a psychiatrist.

So, why am I interested in _Dracula_? I do not believe in the
supernatural, I do not dabble in the occult, I rarely wear black, and I
did not even watch Dracula movies as a teenager. Not very impressive
credentials!

My interest is scholarly. Its roots lie in early nineteenth-century
British Romanticism, or to be more precise, Lord Byron. I had been
teaching a senior course on Byron, Shelley and Keats, and was casting
my eye around for fresh material. I decided on _Frankenstein_ by Mary
Shelley and "The Vampyre" by John Polidori (Byron's personal physician).

It was a short route to Stoker's gothic classic, a novel that has never
been out of print since its initial publication in 1897, and which has
spawned a whole genre of fiction and over 600 movies.

The interdisciplinary nature of the subject matter has provided me with
new avenues to explore, from the connection between Stoker's Count and
the historical Dracula to post-colonial readings of an anxiety-ridden,
anglocentric text.

My work is both intellectually stimulating and enjoyable. What scholar
could ask for anything more? It is surely worth putting up with the
occasional strange look or silent prayer.

And, yes, I am somebody's mother.

-----------
