This is a copy of the Introduction I wrote for "Lord of the
Vampires" by Jeanne Kalogridis (1997), the third in her trilogy "The
Diaries of the Family Dracul". It addresses the nature of the "connection"
between Count Dracula and the historical figure, Vlad the Impaler. For a
much  more detailed (and fully documented) version of this argument, see
Chapter 1 of my book _Reflections on Dracula_, or my essay in _Dracula:
The Shade and the Shadow_.


-------------------
(copyright - Elizabeth Miller)

The trilogy "The Diaries of the Family Dracul", of which Lord of the
Vampires is the third book, draws from history, legend, and fiction. But
it is primarily a work that expands on the text of Dracula, by providing a
"prequel" to Stoker's narrative which overlaps with Dracula in this
present book. The trilogy introduces innovative twists in the familiar
plot that serve to fill in what some readers perceive as gaps in the
original: Why was Abraham Van Helsing so obsessive about tracking down
Dracula? What really happened to the good Professor's wife and son? What
were the origins of the female vampires in Dracula's Transylvanian castle?
Who was the elusive Arminius? But most significantly, the trilogy creates
a pre-history for Count Dracula himself, drawing on the connection between
Stoker's vampire and the 15th century Wallachian prince, Vlad the Impaler
(also known as Dracula). As this is not the first (and certainly will not
be the last) time that the Count and the Voivode have been fused in
fiction (and film), I thought it might be useful to delineate just what
the nature of this intriguing connection actually is.

In spite of the attention paid to Vlad by historians both in Romania and
the West, he is still to some extent an enigma. Even the name by which he
is called is a matter of disagreement. While there is ample evidence that
he himself used the sobriquet "Dracula" (or variations thereof) and was
referred to as such in several 15th and 16th century sources, many
Romanian historians still insist on using the name "Tepes" (meaning
"Impaler"), a hardly flattering nickname first assigned to him by Turkish
chroniclers. Historians attempting to reconstruct his life have had to
sift through numerous printed accounts of his atrocities (many of which
are clearly biased) as well as equally biased Romanian oral narratives and
legends that paint him as a heroic patriot. There are also conflicting
versions about key events, most notably how he was killed and where his
remains are buried. But one fact does emerge from all of this material.
Whatever Vlad might have been, nowhere is it stated that he was (or was
believed to have been) a vampire. That association is clearly the result
of the fact that Bram Stoker decided to appropriate the name "Dracula" for
his villainous Count - much to the chagrin of many Romanians who see the
novel as a denigration of one of their national heroes.

But this raises a key question. To what extent did Bram Stoker actually
base his Count Dracula on Vlad the Impaler? Although for many people today
the two have become almost synonymous, the nature of the connection is
highly speculative. There is no longer any doubt where Stoker found the
name "Dracula". We know from his working papers (housed at the Rosenbach
Museum in Philadelphia) that by March 1890 he had already started work on
the novel, and had even selected a name for his vampire - Count Wampyr. We
also know that, in the summer of the same year while vacationing at
Whitby, he came across the name "Dracula" in a book that he borrowed from
the Whitby Public Library. William Wilkinson's An Account of the
Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia (1820) contains a few brief
references to a "Voivode Dracula" (never referred to as Vlad) who crossed
the Danube and attacked Turkish troops. But what seems to have attracted
Stoker was a footnote in which Wilkinson states that "Dracula in
Wallachian language means Devil." Stoker supplemented this with scraps of
Romanian history from other sources (which he carefully listed in his
notes) and fleshed out a history for his Count Dracula. Wilkinson is
Stoker's only known source for information on the historical namesake.
Everything else is speculation. 

And there is plenty, some of it rather farfetched. For example, it has
been suggested that Stoker drew the concept of the staking of a vampire
from his knowledge of Vlad's penchant for impaling his enemies on stakes;
that Renfield's fondness for insects and small animals is a reenactment of
Vlad's habit of torturing small animals while he was held prisoner in
Hungary; or that Count Dracula is repelled by holy symbols because Vlad
betrayed the Orthodox Church by converting to Roman Catholicism. Such
speculation has arisen from a basic assumption (yet to be proved
conclusively) that Stoker knew much more about Vlad than what he read in
Wilkinson; that his other major sources were the Hungarian professor
Arminius Vambery, and his own readings in the British Museum (both of
which are indirectly alluded to in the novel).

Much has been written of what Stoker may have learned from Vambery. Claims
have been made that Vambery supplied Stoker with information on
Transylvania, vampire lore, and Vlad himself; some suggest that Vambery
may even have introduced Stoker to some of the 15th century materials
about Vlad. But all of this is speculation based on circumstantial
evidence. We do know that the two met at least twice. While we do have a
record of these meetings (Stoker refers to both in his 1906 book,
Reminiscences of Henry Irving), there is nothing to indicate that the
conversation included Vlad, vampires, or even Transylvania. Furthermore,
there is no record of any other correspondence between Stoker and Vambery,
nor is Vambery mentioned in Stoker's notes for Dracula. As for the theory
that what Van Helsing in the novel learns from Arminius (generally seen as
a tribute to Vambery) parallels what Stoker himself gleaned from Vambery,
just about every scrap of this material can readily be traced to Stoker's
known sources. 

While Stoker did conduct some research at the British Museum, there is no
evidence to indicate that he discovered further material about the
historical Dracula. Much speculation surrounds the possibility that he may
have gained access to one of the 15th century German pamphlets about Vlad
the Impaler with a woodcut portrait accompanied by the caption "A wondrous
and frightening story about a great bloodthirsty berserker called
Dracula". This has led some to conclude that Stoker's physical description
of Count Dracula is actually based on this portrait of Vlad. But again,
the concrete evidence just is not there. It is much more likely that
Stoker drew the description of Count Dracula from earlier villains in
Gothic literature, or even from his own employer, Henry Irving.

Count Dracula, as Van Helsing tells us, "must have been that Voivode
Dracula who won his name against the Turk". Indeed he was! But it is
significant that nowhere in Stoker's novel is Dracula referred to as
"Vlad", nor is there any reference to Vlad's famous atrocities, in
particular his use of impalement as his favorite means of execution. Why
would Stoker - a writer who meticulously included detail after detail
(some very insignificant and obscure) from his known sources - ignore
something that would have added so much to his delineation of his villain?
Either he knew more and chose not to use it, or he used what he knew.
Pending much more concrete evidence than has to date been unearthed, I
would accept the latter. All we know for certain is that Stoker found the
name "Dracula" in Wilkinson, obviously liked it, and decided to use it.

The fusing of fact and fiction, while of questionable merit in
reconstructing history, is a superb tool in the hands of an imaginative
writer. As we today, unlike Stoker, know much more about Vlad the Impaler
(thanks primarily to the work of Radu Florescu and Raymond McNally), it is
hardly surprising that the Count and the Voivode have merged. The most
noted occurrence in film is in Francis Ford Coppola's 1992 rendition Bram
Stokers' Dracula, though a connection between the vampire Count and his
historical namesake had been made almost 20 years earlier in the Dan
Curtis production of Dracula with Jack Palance. Examples of the fusion in
fiction are numerous, including such novels as Anno Dracula and The Bloody
Red Baron (by Kim Newman), Children of the Night (Dan Simmons), the
trilogy Dracula Lives! (Peter Tremayne), Drakulya (by Earl Lee) and this
present trilogy. Fiction has made Vlad what he never was in life - a
vampire - and has thus granted him, like his fictional counterpart,
immortality.



				Elizabeth Miller
				Professor of English
				Memorial University of Newfoundland 		
