Hello, and welcome to my home page.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
While you may feel free to download any of the material and/or photos on
this site for your personal use, their use in any published form, without
my permission, is a violation of copyright. For permission, contact me at
emiller@plato.ucs.mun.ca

Now, let me introduce myself. I am Elizabeth Miller, a professor 
with the Department of English at Memorial University of Newfoundland 
(in Canada). My special interest is in 19th century British Gothic 
Fiction, with particular emphasis on Mary Shelley's _Frankenstein_ and 
Bram Stoker's _Dracula_. I am very active in Dracula Studies, having 
given papers on everyone's favorite vampire in Canada, the U.S., Ireland, 
Germany, and Romania. I am also President of the Canadian Chapter, 
Transylvanian Society of Dracula (an organization based in Romania) and of
the Lord Ruthven Assembly, a constituent group within the International
Association for the Fantastic in the Arts.

I have recently completed writing a book entitled _Reflections on
Dracula_. It covers a variety of Dracula-related topics in essay form. 
Also recently published is _Dracula: The Shade and the Shadow_, a
collection of 20 papers from "Dracula 97" which I edited.
Further information on both books is available elsewhere on this site.

This web site will be devoted to Dracula-related topics. A few words of 
explanation may be in order:


     The photograph of me in the cape was taken at the Dracula Museum 
     (New York), owned and operated by Jeanne Youngson, President of the
     Count Dracula Fan Club. The cape may have been the one that Frank
     Langella wore for the Broadway production of _Dracula_ in the 1970s.

     This site is intended as a source of information about Dracula: the
     novel by Bram Stoker and its influence on popular culture; the
     historical Dracula and the Romanian connection; publications,
     conferences, web sites etc. that deal with these topics. 

     The links on this site are screened periodically for suitability of
     content. Any containing pornographic material will be excluded.

I hope you enjoy these pages. The site is always under revision and more
features will be added in the weeks to come. 


     
