BOOK OF THE MONTH

[Each month I will select and write a short commentary on a new vampire
book, either fiction or non-fiction, and include it at this location.] 

____________________

[NO SELECTION FOR AUGUST. AM ON VACATION. WILL RESUME IN SEPTEMBER]


JULY 1999

BRAM STOKER: HISTORY, PSYCHOANALYSIS AND THE GOTHIC
William Hughes & Andrew Smith (eds)
London: Macmillan 1998
ISBN: 0-312-21115-5

This is definitely a book for scholars only. It comprises 12 essays which
approach Stoker's work (not only DRACULA but some of his other novels)
from the perspective of historicism, psychology and genre. The
introduction provides a superb overview of critical responses to Stoker's
work during the twentieth century. Contributors include Joseph
Bierman, David Seed, David Punter, Maggie Kilgour, and Marie
Mulvey-Roberts. While I would not recommend this volume for the casual
reader (some of the articles might be "heavy going"), it is an essential
addition to the library of any serious student of Stoker and DRACULA.


-----------------

JUNE 1999

RED SHADOWS
Yvonne Navarro
Bantam 1998
ISBN: 0-553-57749-2

This is a sequel to FINAL IMPACT, but can be read independently without
any difficulty. The narrative follows a group of humans who twenty years
earlier had survived the collision of Earth with fragments of a rogue
planet. Now they face new dangers, the greatest of which is a plague
called "Red Shadows". While not strictly a vampire novel, there are
vampires in it - so it qualifies! It combines both terror and horror in a
very convincing way, and is quite well written. A page turner!

_________________

MAY 1999

THE SOUL OF AN ANGEL
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro
Avon, 1999
ISBN: 0-380-97401-0

This is the second book in Yarbro's trilogy about the 3 "vampire brides"
in Dracula's castle. [For the the first novel, THE ANGRY ANGEL, see entry
below for July 1998.] While it is not absolutely necessary to have read
the first, such a reading does permit a more complete appreciation of the
second.

This time the main character is Fenice, A Venetian girl with a spirit for
adventure that finds little outlet in her restricted home and
social environment. She runs away and has a series of adventures that
ultimately bring her face to face with the Dragon Prince from Transylvania
(guess who?). Ending up at Dracula's castle, she has to share her lord's
attentions with Kelene, who has no doubts that she is "numero uno". The
consequences are quite interesting!

The third book is forthcoming.

-----------------

APRIL 1999

BLOOD WORK
Fay Zachary
Berkley, 1994
ISBN 0-425-14047-4

This book has been around for a while, but I just recently went back to it
and enjoyed reading it a second time. It's a "medical thriller", clearly
influenced by theories about the possible connection between rare blood
diseases and reported cases of "vampirism". While I would certainly
classify this as a vampire novel, it does not contain a single vampire!
Rather, what we have is a deranged man who, urged on by newspaper
sensationalism about cases of the "vampire" disease in a local hospital,
takes it upon himself to be Chief Vampire Hunter. I highly recommend this
well-written and well-researched novel. I also recommend Fay's excellent
web site, especially her Vampire Hall. Visit it at
http://fregalry.interspeed.net/vampire.htm

--------------------

MARCH 1999

VAMPIRE READINGS
Patricia Altner
Scarecrow Press, 1998
ISBN 0-8108-3504-5

If you are looking for titles of vampire novels to read, then this book is
a MUST for you. It is an annotated bibliography of vampire literature,
with the emphasis on fiction published in the last 10-15 years. Included
are 280 novels, 349 anthologies and novellas, 34 Young Adult books, and a
listing of more obscure titles. Entries are easy to find, and there's  an
index for each of Authors and Titles. The annotations are, for the most
part, non-judgemental, yet give you sufficient information to decide
whether a particular book is one you want to read. 

If there is a deficiency in this book, it is in the listings of 
non-fictional works. A number of major books (by Leatherdale and Frayling,
for example) are not included. But as VAMPIRE READINGS is not intended as
a resource book of academic works, this is a minor quibble. Altner's book
does what it set out to do, and does it well.

--------------------


FEBRUARY 1999

THE VAMPIRE: A CASEBOOK
Alan Dundes (ed)
U of Wisconsin Press, 1998
ISBN 0-299-15924-8

This is most definitely a scholarly book and may be of limited interest to
the average Dracula/vampire fan. But for anyone researching the vampire in
folklore and history, it is a "must". It is a series of essays, most
of which have been previously published sometimes in obscure journals. 
Included are articles by Agnes Murgoci ("The Vampire in Romania"),
Katharina Wilson ("The History of the Word 'Vampire'"), Jan Perkowski
("The Romanian Folkloric Vampire") and Paul Barber (Forensic Pathology and
the European Vampire"). 


------------------

JANUARY 1999

THE VAMPIRE BOOK: THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE UNDEAD (revised)
J. Gordon Melton
Visible Ink Press, 1998
ISBN 1-57859-071-X

My first selection for 1999 is this massive tome (almost 900 pages of
material) by Gordon Melton. True, he published the first edition in 1994
and there is, of course, lots of overlap. But this revised edition has a
considerable amount of new material; for example, on "Dark Shadows",
"Vampires on the Internet", RPGs, and several new entries on individuals
prominent in the field (including yours truly!) There is so much revised
and new material that I have no hesitation recommending it to those who
already own the 1994 edition. For those who don't, this one is essential.

---------------------


DECEMBER 1998

FOREVER KNIGHT: INTIMATIONS OF MORTALITY
Susan M. Garrett
Boulevard Books, 1997
ISBN 1-57297-313-7

This month's selection is a novel - and a very good one, at that! If you
are a fan of the "Forever Knight" television series, then this is a book
for you. Here you will find all your favorite characters - Nick Knight,
Natalie Lambert, Tracy Vetter, Janette, Vachon and LaCroix. But the
situation has changed! Without giving away too much of the plot, we are
presented with a set of reversals in which Nick and LaCroix are the
mortals, while Natalie is a vampire whose task is to restore Nick's
immortality. Quite clever. And well written.

-----------------


NOVEMBER 1998

DRACULA: BETWEEN TRADITION AND MODERNISM
Carol A. Senf
Twayne, 1998

This is a scholarly, yet very readable, overview of Stoker's novel which
provides a number of readings of the text in its historical context.
Rather than taking one critical approach, Senf combines many. Separate
chapters are devoted to narrative technique, racial issues, gender issues,
class divisions, madness, Victorian science, and late nineteenth-century
technology.

__________________________

OCTOBER 1998

DRACULA: THE SHADE AND THE SHADOW
Elizabeth Miller (ed)
Desert Island Books, 1998
ISBN 1-874287-10-4

This book contains twenty of the papers presented at "Dracula 97" in Los
Angeles in August 1997. All of them focus on Dracula. (A second volume,
with papers on non-Dracula vampire topics, is being planned.) The essays
range in subject matter from possible sources for Stoker's novel to a
variety of readings of the text. Contributors include Nina Auerbach,
David Dickens, Radu Florescu, William Hughes, Clive Leatherdale, Elizabeth
Miller, Stephanie Moss and others. While this is a "scholarly" book, the
articles are written in a very readable prose style.

Further details about this book can be found elsewhere on this web site.


------------------------


SEPTEMBER 1998

DRACULA IN THE DARK
James Craig Holte
Greenwood Press, 1997
ISBN 0-313-29215-9

This book is a scholarly treatise on the history of the Dracula film
adaptations. Following an introductory chapter on the background of
vampires and DRACULA, the author begins with "Nosferatu" and works through
to Coppola's "Bram Stoker's Dracula". He also includes several other
vampire films and a chapter on Female Film Vampires.

While much of the material in this book would already be familiar to film
buffs (especially those who have read David Skal's work), there are new
insights and an attempt is made to trace a development in terms of
contemporary culture. In spite of several typos and a couple of factual
errors, this book is a useful survey of Dracula/vampire films, and has the
advantage of a chronological filmography.

______________________________


AUGUST 1998

BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA UNEARTHED
Edited and annotated by Clive Leatherdale
Westcliff-on-Sea: Desert Island Books, 1998
ISBN: 1-874287-12-0


Here, at last, is a thoroughly annotated text of Stoker's DRACULA. IN
fact, for the reader who enjoys annotations, this is a MUST. There are
about 3500 of them, ranging from explanations and identifications to brief
commentaries. Leatherdale also includes a comprehensive introduction (in
which he challenges many of the misconceptions that surround the novel), a
"Dramatis Personae", a list of Stoker's sources for the novel, and the
text of Stoker's Preface to the 1901 Icelandic edition.

This book is far superior to all previous annotated editions. Florescu &
McNally's THE ESSENTIAL DRACULA focuses too heavily on the Transylvanian
chapters with only scanty notes on the mid-section of the book, while
Leonard Wolf's THE ANNOTATED DRACULA (repr as THE ESSENTIAL DRACULA)
ignores Stoker's own working notes for the novel. The more recent
Norton Critical Edition is very lightly annotated.

______________________________

JULY 1998

THE ANGRY ANGEL
By Chelsea Quinn Yarbro
New York: Avon Books, 1998
ISBN: 0-380-97400-2

This month's selection is one of the best books of vampire fiction that I
have ever read. And to think that it is just the first of a trilogy! The
three books will create a "history" for each of the three female vampires
that Jonathan Harker encounters in Cunt Dracula's castle. THE ANGRY ANGEL
is Kelene, the fair-haired one, who escaped with her family from the
horrors of the Turkish invasion of her homeland in Salonika. Their
struggles and hardships are catalogued as they flee from one refuge to
another, sinking deeper and deeper into despair and misery. Kelene's fate
is to be drawn to a mysterious "angel" who possesses her body and soul.
Dracula makes her his own, and takes her with him to his castle in
Transylvania.

Like all of Yarbro's vampire novels, this one is exceptionally well
researched. Unlike the St. Germain stories, howeever, she depicts a
vampire who is true to Stoker's creation of Dracula - cruel, calculating,
and evil.

----------------------------

JUNE 1998

DRACULA OR THE UNDEAD
Edited  by Sylvia Starshine
Nottingham: Pumpkin Books, 1997
ISBN: 1-901914-04-6

Finally, Stoker's own adaptation of DRACULA as a dramatic reading is in
print! This book is a "must" for the serious Dracula scholar who is
interested in the genesis and publication history of the novel.

In a move that was apparently designed to protect his new novel from
pirating by writers for the stage, Stoker put together a reading which was
performed one time only at the Lyceum Theatre in London (where he worked
as Henry Irving's Acting Manager) on May 18, 1897. Silvia Starshine,
editor of this present volume, has brought together a fine set of
information about that performance and the actors who participated in the
reading. The text itself is, for the most part, a "cut and paste" job,
apparently from galleys for the novel. But not entirely! There are
additions, changes, stage directions, notes (in Stoker's hand), all of
which help illuminate the process from  novel to dramatic reading.

It is quite obvious that Stoker was aware of the dramatic potential of
DRACULA, even though that potential would not be realized until the 1920s,
well after his death.

_________________________


MAY 1998

THE INGRID PITT BEDSIDE COMPANION FOR VAMPIRE LOVERS
By Ingrid Pitt
London: BT Batsford, 1998

This is a most entertaining romp through the vampire scene. While there is
little new material (except, maybe, the insights into the author's own
life and movie career), the method of presentation is delightful. Those of
you who may have met Ingrid Pitt at "Dracula 97" will not doubt remember
her dry sense of hunor and wry (at times even biting) wit. This is most
evident in her book and is, in my view, its most appealing characteristic.
In addition to her own cinemantic experiences, she provides an overview of
Vlad the Impaler, the development of the literary vampire, vampires in the
movies, etc.

Ingrid Pitt is best known to vampire fans for her leading roles in the
movies "Countess Dracula" (a story of Elizabeth Bathory) and "Vampire
Lovers" (a loose adaptation of Le Fanu's "Carmilla").

By no means a scholarly book (and not intended as such), a delightful
read!

----------------------------------


APRIL 1998

THE MAMMOTH BOOK OF DRACULA
Edited by Stephen Jones
London: Robinson, 1997
ISBN: 1-85487-520-5

If you, in spite of the plethora of literary vampires on the market, still
have a "soft spot" for Count Dracula, this is a book for you! Subtitled
"Vampire Tales for the New Millennium," this volume contains 33 stories
which spin off in some way from the character of Dracula. Authors such as
Hugh Cave, Nancy Kilpatrick, R. Chetwynd-Hayes, Nancy Holder, Kim Newman,
Brian Stableford, F. Paul Wilson and many others provide various visions
of how Dracula would adapt to the contemporary scene.

My favorite story in the anthology (it alone makes the book worth buying!)
is "Coppola's Dracula" by Kim Newman. The premise is this: that Coppola
put the effort into his "Dracula" that he did into "Apocalypse Now". The
result is a brilliant intertextual weaving of Stoker's novel, Coppola's
movie version, "Apocalypse Now" and the documentary "Hearts of Darkness".

This collection is a superb tribute to Bram Stoker's _Dracula_ and solid
evidence that the Count will never die.


----------------------------------

MARCH 1998

DRACULA by Bram Stoker
Edited by Glennis Byron
Broadview, 1998
ISBN 1-55111-136-5

While this may seem to be just another edition of Stoker's novel, it does
have some very useful material. The introduction is superb, and connects
the novel to its times. There are useful items in the appendices,
including segments from an interview with Bram Stoker shortly after the
novel was published. The book is also very reasonably priced.

The back cover contains endorsements by David Glover, Carol Senf, Margaret
Carter, and Elizabeth Miller.

--------------------------------

FEBRUARY 1998

WRIT IN BLOOD
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro
Tor, 1997
ISBN 0-312-86318-7

The latest in her series of Saint-Germain novels, this time Yarbro sets
her tale in pre-World War 1 Europe. We are taken into the foray of
political intrigue among the likes of the Russian Czar, the German Kaiser
and the British King. And of course there is a love-interest, an artist
named Rowena. For those who enjoy historical fiction with plenty of period
detail, the Saint-Germain series is a "must".

By the way, this book is dedicated to "Elizabeth Miller, Dennis Miller and
Daniel Richler - Canadians in Transylvania", an allusion to the wonderful
time we all had in Romania in 1995 for the World Dracula Congress.

----------------

JANUARY 1998

BRAM STOKER: A BIBLIOGRAPHY
Compiled by William Hughes
Victorian Fiction Research Guides
University of Queensland, 1997
ISBN 0-86776-641-7

This 73-page compilation is an invaluable resource for the Bram Stoker
scholar. Its most useful feature is the listing of all known works written
by Stoker, including a number of obscure stories and articles (even
poetry). Did you know, for example, that Stoker wrote a poem entitled "The
One Thing Needful" and a serial in 10 chapters entitled "The Primrose
Path"?

Hughes also writes a solid Introduction on Stoker, his life and works.
He includes a list of contemporary reviews of Stoker's novels, and a
useful Bibliography of modern criticism.


--------------

DECEMBER 1997

BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA: SUCKING THROUGH THE CENTURY, 1897-1997
Edited by Carol Margaret Davison
Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1997
ISBN 1-55002-279-2

This month's selection is a superb collection of scholarly articles,
published on the occasion of the Dracula centennial year. The essays are
divided into the following sections: Dracula - 1890s Vampire Text;
Dracula - Twentieth Century Vampirised Text; Mondo Dracula - Celluloid
Vampires; Dracula at Large - Vampires and Society; "The Red Pages" -
Stoker/Dracula Associations/Resources; Appendix and "The Bloody
Bibliography".

Contributors to this volume include Carol A. Senf, Jan B. Gordon,
Stephanie Moss, Margaret L. Carter, Veronica Hollinger, Norma Rowen, Nina
Auerbach, Benjamin Leblanc, Bernard Davies, Elizabeth Miller, Leslie
Shepard, and others.

This book is a "must" for anyone with a scholarly interest in Dracula.
432 pages.

-----------------------------


NOVEMBER 1997

BLOOD THIRST: 100 YEARS OF VAMPIRE FICTION
Edited by Leonard Wolf
New York: Oxford University Press, 1997
ISBN 0-19-511593-7


If you are looking for a good cross-section of 20th century literary
vampires, this may be the book for you. The anthology includes both short
stories and excerpts from novels by prominent writers such as Stephen
King, Joyce Carol Oates, Richard Matheson, Suzy McKee Charnas, Tanith Lee,
Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, and Anne Rice.

The selections are organized into six categories, emphasizing the wide
spectrum of representations of the vampire figure in our century: The
Classic Adventure Tale, The Psychological Vampire, The Science Fiction
Vampire, The Non-Human Vampire, The Comic Vampire, The Heroic Vampire.
Each section has a short introduction by the editor, and biographical
notes are included for each author. This would make an excellent text for
anyone teaching a course in post-Dracula vampire literature.

I do have a few quibbles with Leonard Wolf's Introduction. He not only
dates Polidori's "The Vampyre" as 1821 (it was published in 1819) but it
states that it was written in answer to Lord Byron's famous
challenge. This is not quite correct. Polidori picked up on a fragment
that Byron had written, and developed it later into "The Vampyre". Wolf
expresses surprise at the story's durability; but this was due to the fact
that it was published under Lord Byron's name. Finally, Wolf claims that
Stoker found "most of the vampire lore" in Emily Gerard's book _The Land
Beyond the Forest_. Actually, there is no evidence that he read this book,
though we know for certain that he read her article "Transylvanian
Superstitions" (which was incorporated into the book). While he did find
some vampire lore in Gerard's article, he most likely found as much (if
not more) in earlier vampire fiction.
