Here are my PERSONAL HIGHLIGHTS of "Dracula 97":


#1: THE DEBATE WITH RAYMOND McNALLY

Billed as "The Great Debate", "The Mother of All Debates" and the "Debate
of the Dynamic Duo", this was in my view a resounding success. It was well
attended (standing-room only in a room that accommodated 100). Chairing
the session was Montreal scholar Benjamin Leblanc, who used as a gavel a
wooden stake, which he threatened to employ against the first debater who
stepped out of line. (I am glad to say he did not have to use it. We were
both very well behaved!)

I started with a 20-minute paper entitied "Filing for Divorce: The Case of
Vlad Tepes vs Count Dracula". I argued that the commonly held view that
Stoker based his character of the count on Vlad the Impaler is fallacious;
that Stoker borrowed the name "Dracula" along with a few scraps of rather
vague information from William Wilkinson, but knew nothing else about the
historical figure. Furthermore, I argued, there is no evidence to 
support claims that Stoker learned about Vlad either from Arminius 
Vambery or from research he conducted at the British Museum.

McNally's response was that Stoker did indeed know quite a bit about Vlad,
though he did concede that it is not clear if and how he obtained any of
it from Vambery. His own research altered some of the original statements
made in _In Search of Dracula_ (1972) and are reflected in the revised
edition (1994). He agreed that some have taken his original theories to
the extreme, but contended that he cannot be held responsible for the
excesses of others.

A very lively discussion followed. We succeeded, I believe, not in
settling the matter (not our intention) but in raising provocative issues
for future research. We agreed to disagree, called it a "draw" and
proceeded to the Bar for a drink!



#2: SHARING THE SPOTLIGHT WITH ELVIRA

Just briefly, and the camera were never focused on me!! But it was fun! I
(along with Gordon Melton) accompanied Elvira into the Ballroom for the
Opening Ceremonies and was seated next to her in the front row. While we
waited for the event to begin, I had a chance to chat with her and was a
bit surprised to find that her wit is genuine, not just a stage gimmick.
But such an incongruity - the Dracula scholar and the Mistress of the
Dark! (Check out the photo.)


#3. MEETING SPECIAL GUESTS

There were several special guests at "Dracula 97" whom I had never met,
and this finally gave me the opportunity. On top of the list I would put
Jeanne Kalogridis (author of the "Covenant with the Vampire" trilogy).
Even though I had written the Foreword for her most recent book (_Lord of
the Vampires_) and had received a glowing acknowledgement, I had never met
Jeanne in person. It was a delightful experience.

Another writer I have always wanted to meet was Fred Saberhagen. I had the
opportunity of meeting him (and his wife) at the airport. I stood there
(with Jeanne Youngson) with my little sign reading "Dracula 97", watching
as the passengers deplaned (I had no idea what Fred looked like), but he
spotted us without any difficulty. (So did a few other passengers who gave
us rather strange looks!)

I had another sign for Veronica Carlson whom I also met at LAX (with
Anne-Marie Finn). I remembered her from "Dracula Has Risen from the Grave"
(with Christopher Lee) and was looking for someone vaguely similar but
20-plus years older. I recognized her immediately. She has hardly changed
one iota from her appearance way back then. In addition to her strikingly
beautiful physical appearance, Veronica possesses a warmth of personality
that made me like her instantly.



OTHERS

Honorable Mention go to:

The Dating Game (run by Bev Richardson)
The Costume Contest (a visual delight)
Drac's Marketplace (when I finally got time to visit)
Reading a message of welcome from Patrick Stoker (Bram's great-nephew)
A social gathering for Romanians and Canadians (a potent combination)
