REVIEWS of DRACULA: THE SHADE AND THE SHADOW


From the _Bram Stoker Society Newsletter_ (Dublin, Ireland), July 1999

Most of us in Ireland were unable to attend the Dracula Centennial
Celebrations in Los Angeles during August 1997. In a year in which there
were many learned conferences to commemorate the first hundred years of
Bram Stoker's immortal Gothic creation, that hosted in California was
"facile princeps", in terms of its sheer scope, its truly international
character, and the quality of its presentations.
	
Over eighty papers from a host of world-renowned Dracula commentators were
read during the course of that memorable month. Professor Elizabeth
Miller, from Memorial University of Newfoundland, who is President of the
Canadian Chapter of the Transylvanian Society of Dracula, has edited and
compiled twenty of these for Clive Leatherdale's meticulously presented
Desert Island Dracula Library.
	
Although the topics are many and varied, Professor Miller has
grouped the essays, logically and intelligibly, under broad headings.
First into the field is noted commentator Nina Auerbach who posits and
addresses the question why is it that Dracula still exerts and enduring
fascination in a world so vastly different from that which begot him,
through such a huge diversity of styles and forms of presentation.  There
then follow five discrete sections, each featuring a number of essays: the
Germanic influence on Dracula, Dracula's place in Victorian England,
Textual Analysis, Historical Analysis and New Perspectives.
	
While all the essays are accessible, some are more tailored to the
non-academic reader that others.  Accordingly, some are of reasonable
length, with footnotes, while others are more succinct, introducing novel
analyses or theories without the burden of detailed academic overlay.
Members of the Bram Stoker Society are well represented in this
collection and severla of the titles will be familiar to those attending
the annual Bram Stoker International Summer School at Clontarf, where the
prototype or modified versions of some of the papers have been presented.

Clive Leatherdale's own "Stoker's Banana Skins: Errors, Illogicalities and
Misconceptions in Dracula" makes a welcome appearance, and many will be
delighted to get their hands on Elizabeth Miller's "Filing for Divorce:
Count Dracula vs. Vlad Tepes".  Diane Milburn, who made her Irish debut at
the 1998 summer school, is represented by "‘For the Dead Travel Fast':
Dracula in Anglo-German Context", which resembles the paper she delivered
here.  There are interesting pieces from William Hughes and Marinella
Lorinczi and the insightful wittiness of Bernard Davies's "Inspirations,
Imitations and In-Jokes in Stoker's Dracula" will come as no surprise to
those who heard him in Dublin last November, at the first Dublin-hosted
Gothic Literature Symposium.

A delightfully presented collection of essays, well worth acquiring.

----------------

(Review by Cathy Krusberg for THE VAMPIRE'S CRYPT)


Elizabeth Miller's scholarly anthology collects 20 conference papers  from
"Dracula 97," organized into five broad categories: sources  for DRACULA;
the light the novel sheds on late Victorian England;  analyses of the text
itself; aspects of the historical Dracula;  and new readings of DRACULA.
Preceding these papers is an essay  in which Nina Auerbach observes that
"as I become increasingly  saturated in DRACULA, I find it -- at least,
him -- increasingly  alienating. I do not want to live in a coffin; ... I
do not want  to be bitten by a creature who is neither human, friendly,
nor  communicative." So (she asks) "Why are we giving Dracula a  birthday
party at all?" Auerbach offers one answer: the twentieth  century has in
effect redeemed Dracula, changing him from a  silence in the middle of his
own story to a creature expert at  media manipulation of all sorts.

But even writers of the century that has seen Dracula's  redemption are
not blind to the old creature's inhuman,  threatening nature. Valdine
Clemens writes of "Dracula: The Reptilian Brain at the Fin de Siecle,"
contrasting the novel's  extensive use of modern technological devices
(typewriter,  phonograph, telephone, hypodermic injection, blood
transfusion) with Dracula's reliance on a literally "reptilian" way of
thinking. Vampires and reptiles share not only the traits of not  caring
for their young, lack of sexual bonds, and lack of the  mammalian capacity
for play, but the primitive "reptile brain's"  reliance on instinct and
habit. Amanda Fernbach, in "Dracula's  Decadent Fetish," explicates
another of DRACULA's (or Dracula's)  threats: "DRACULA offers a decadent
deconstruction of gender,  presenting images of feminized men and
masculinized women under  the sign of vampirism." In "Corruption Becomes
Itself Corrupt"  Marion Muirhead shows Dracula as a vehicle of entropy, a
Victorian-era answer to the late twentieth century phenomenon of 
the serial killer.

Articles on sources for DRACULA include "The German Matrix of  Stoker's
Dracula" by David B. Dickens and "For the Dead Travel  Fast" by Diane
Milburn. These two essays show opposite sides of  Stoker's use of things
German. Dickens portrays Van Helsing as an essentially German protagonist;
Milburn, in contrast, finds Dracula a vampire of Germanic extraction
representing a threateningly expansionist German empire.

Examining the text itself, Pericles Lewis, in "Epistemology of  the
Victorian Gothic Novel," describes how the metafiction that  amounts to
the book's introduction undercuts suspension of  disbelief and leads the
reader to doubt the reliability of the very documents that constitute the
narrative. David Schmid  explores a similar theme in "Is the Pen Mightier
than the Sword?  The Contradictory Function of Writing in Dracula."
Writing is  ubiquitous in the novel (necessarily, since it is told through
documents rather than by an omniscient narrator), yet the vampire  is
overcome by his own weapons -- violence, blood, and money --  turned
against him. Writing can record the struggle but  ultimately has no effect
on its outcome. In the perhaps misleadingly titled "Bram Stoker and the
Society for Psychical  Research," Stephanie Moss looks at evidence
indicating that the novel reflects Stoker's interest in and familiarity
with  early psychoanalytic theory.

Among the more lay-friendly articles is Bernard Davies's "Inspirations,
Imitations, and In-Jokes in Stoker's Dracula." Davies reveals how Stoker
gave the novel an "impish, cryptic sub-text" in the form of numerous
details included for the benefit of relatives or friends, such as Van
Helsing and Seward's visit to a hospital in Hampstead ... where Stoker's
cousin was a hospital superintendent. These numerous digs show that (1)
Stoker was not writing merely driven by an obsessive impulse born of
repressed sexuality but was fully in control of his material (if tongue in
cheek) and (2) DRACULA could not have been, as H. P. Lovecraft claimed,
ghosted for Stoker by an American; only Stoker himself could have included
such a wealth of personal detail.

In "Stoker's Banana Skins: Errors, Illogicalities and Misconceptions in
Dracula," Clive Leatherdale echoes (sometimes more thoroughly, sometimes
more concisely) material in his DRACULA UNEARTHED on such topics as "Vlad
Dracula versus Count Dracula," Arminius Vambery, "Dracula's Guest," and
DRACULA's internal inconsistencies. Elizabeth Miller's own "Filing for
Divorce: Count Dracula vs. Vlad Tepes" offers convincing evidence that
Stoker did not in fact *base* his vampire count on a historical character.
Stoker was writing a Gothic novel, not a historical treatise; his notes,
as well as the novel's careful avoidance of substantial details about the
historical Dracula, demonstrate that he knew, and used, little more than
the name of the Wallachian warlord.

Another historical versus fictional Dracula dichotomy underlies Radu
Florescu's article "What's in a Name: Dracula or Vlad the Impaler?" His
answer demonstrates that the name "Dracula" was used for Vlad III of the
Basarab dynasty by both Vlad himself and his contemporaries (in several
nations and languages) and defends its usage in modern times, pointing out
that it has fallen out of favor with Romanians and historians solely
because of its connection to Stoker's fictional character.

Although these articles are not hard reading in terms of vocabulary or
style, much of the content, whether historical or literary analysis, is
sufficiently technical to be intimidating and/or dull to the non-scholar.
Most of the essays are short, however, which could make this volume a good
introduction to scholarship for non-academic readers. For those of
scholarly inclinations: All articles of course include notes and
bibliography and represent a multifaceted cross-section of the type of
attention DRACULA is attracting one hundred years into its publishing
history.

Desert Island Books publishes a number of Dracula-related titles.You can
check out their website at  http://www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~desert/

